[Music]
no js' or note is an open source and
cross-platform runtime environment for
executing JavaScript code outside of a
browser quite often we use no to build
back-end services also called api's or
application programming interfaces these
are the services that power our client
applications like a web app running
inside of a web browser or mobile app
running on a mobile device these client
apps are simply what the user sees and
interacts with they're just the surface
they need to talk to some services
sitting on the server or in the cloud to
store data send emails or push
notifications kick off workflows and so
on node is ideal for building highly
scalable data intensive and real-time
back-end services that power our client
applications now you might ask but mosh
there are other tools and frameworks out
there for building back-end services
such as a speed a bed rails Django and
so on so what's so special about no well
note is easy to get started and can be
used for prototyping and agile
development but it can also be used for
building super fast and highly scalable
services it's used in production by
large companies such as PayPal uber
Netflix Walmart and so on in fact at
PayPal that rebuilt one of their Java
and spring based applications using node
and it found that the node application
was built twice as fast with fewer
people in 33% fewer lines of code and
40% fewer files and more importantly
they double the number of requests
served per second while decreasing the
average response time by 35% so node is
an excellent choice for building highly
scalable services another reason for
using node is that in old applications
we use JavaScript so if you're a
front-end developer and know JavaScript
you can reuse your JavaScript skills and
- a full-stack developer and get a
better job with better pay you don't
have to learn a new programming language
also because you can use JavaScript both
on the front end and on the back end
your source code will be cleaner and
more consistent so you will use the same
naming conventions the same tools and
the same best practices and finally
another reason for using node is that it
has the largest ecosystem of open source
libraries available to you so for pretty
much any features or building blocks you
want to add your application there is
some free open source library out there
that you can use so you don't have to
build this building blocks from scratch
and instead you can focus on the core of
your application next we're going to
look at the architecture of node
so in the last video you learned that
note is a runtime environment for
executing JavaScript code but what is a
runtime environment really well before
node we use JavaScript only to build
applications that run inside of a
browser so every browser out there has
what we call a JavaScript engine that
takes our JavaScript code and converts
it to code that a computer can
understand for example Microsoft eight
uses chakra Firefox uses spider monkey
and chrome uses v8 and it's because of
these varieties of engines that
sometimes JavaScript code can behave
differently in one browser or another
now a browser provides a runtime
environment for JavaScript code for
example you probably know that in
browsers we have the window or the
document object these objects allow us
to work with the environment in which
our code is running now up to 2009 the
only way to execute JavaScript code was
inside of a browser in 2009
Brian Dahl the creator of node came up
with a brilliant idea he thought it
would be great to execute JavaScript
outside of a browser so he took Google's
v8 engine which is the fastest
JavaScript engine out there and embedded
it inside a C++ program and called that
program node so similar to a browser
node is a runtime environment for
JavaScript code it contains a JavaScript
engine that can execute our JavaScript
code but it also has certain objects
that provide an environment for our
JavaScript code but these objects are
different from the environment objects
we have in browsers for example we don't
have the document object instead we have
other objects that give us more
interesting capabilities for example we
can work with the file system listen for
requests and a given port and so on we
can't do stuff like that inside of a
browser right so in essence node is a
program that includes the v8 JavaScript
engine plus some additional modules that
give us capabilities not available
inside
browsers we can work with the file
system or the network and so on both
chrome and note share the same
JavaScript engine but they provide
different runtime environments for
JavaScript now I've seen people
comparing no to c-sharp or Ruby or some
other programming languages but this
comparisons are fundamentally wrong
because node is not a programming
language it's like comparing a car with
an apple by the same token note should
not be compared with frameworks such as
a spool of meth or rails or Django and
so on these are frameworks for building
web applications note is not a framework
it's a runtime environment for executing
JavaScript code next we're going to look
at how node works
so earlier I mentioned that note
applications are highly scalable and
this is because of the non-blocking or
asynchronous nature of note what do you
mean by asynchronous let me give you a
metaphor imagine you go to a restaurant
a waiter comes to your table takes your
order and gives it to the kitchen then
they move on to serve another table
while the chef is preparing your meal so
the same person can serve many different
tables they don't have to wait for the
chef to cook one meal before they serve
another table this is what we call
non-blocking or asynchronous
architecture and this is how node
applications work the waiter is like a
thread allocated to handle a request so
a single thread is used to handle
multiple requests in contrast to
non-blocking
or asynchronous architecture we have
blocking or synchronous architecture
let's see how that works so back to our
restaurant example imagine you go to
another restaurant and in this
restaurant a waiter is allocated to you
they take your order and give it to the
kitchen now they are sitting in the
kitchen waiting for the chef to prepare
your meal at this time they're not doing
anything else they're just waiting
they're not going to take an order from
another table until your meal is ready
this is what we call blocking or
synchronous architecture and that's how
applications built with frameworks like
a speed net or rails work out of the box
so when we receive a request on the
server a thread is allocated to handle
that request as part of handling that
requests and is likely that we're going
to query a database and as you know
sometimes it may take a little while
until the result is ready when the
database is executing the query that
thread is sitting there waiting it can't
be used to serve another client so we
need a new thread to serve another
client imagine what would happen if we
have a large number of concurrent
clients at some point we're going to run
out of threads to serve these clients so
new clients have to wait until three
threads are available
or if we don't want them to wait we need
to add more hardware so with this kind
of architecture we are not utilizing our
resources efficiently this is the
problem with blocking or synchronous
architecture and as I explained that's
how applications built with frameworks
like a speed a that worked by default of
course in asp.net it is possible to use
asynchronous architecture what you will
have to do extra work for now in
contrast no the applications are
asynchronous by default so you don't
have to do anything extra
in node we have a single thread to
handle all requests when a request
arrives that single thread is used to
handle that request if we need to query
a database or thread doesn't have to
wait for the database to return the data
while the database is executing our
query that thread will be used to serve
another client when the database
prepares the result it puts a message in
what we call an event queue node is
continuously monitoring this queue in
the background
when it finds an event in this queue it
will take it out and process it this
kind of architecture makes node ideal
for building applications that include a
lot of disk or network access we can
serve more clients without the need to
throw in more hardware and that's why no
the applications are highly scalable in
contrast node should not be used for CPU
intensive applications like a video
encoding or an image manipulation
service in this kind of applications we
have a lot of calculations that should
be done by CPU and few operations that
touch the file system or the network
since no the applications are single
threaded when performing the
calculations to serve one client other
clients have to wait and that's why node
should not be used or CPU intensive
applications it should only be used for
building data intensive and real-time
applications okay
enough theory Nix I'm gonna show you how
to install node and build your first
node application
you
in this lecture I'm going to show you
how to install note if you're on Windows
open up command prompt if you're on Mac
or Linux open up the terminal first
let's see if you already have node on
your machine or not so run note space -
- version you can see on this machine
I'm running node version 6.0 point three
this is an earlier version of node the
latest stable version is version eight
now on your machine chances are you may
not have known or you might have an
earlier version either way I want you to
install the latest version of node
so open up your browser and head over to
note J s org on this home page you can
see we have two versions for note one is
the latest stable version which is
recommended for most users at the time
of recording this video test version
eight point nine point one and there's
always a newer version which is
experimental and it might not be stable
so I want you to install the latest
stable version also take into account
that in the future when you're watching
this video chances are the latest stable
version might be newer if you're worried
that this course is going to get
outdated don't worry because in this
course we're going to focus on the
fundamentals so I'm going to work with
the core modules of note these core
modules are stable they have been there
for a long time so the code that we're
going to write in this course will
continue to work with the future
versions of note once you master the
fundamentals you can always learn about
the new features that come in every
version by looking at the change lock so
let's not worry about the fancy new
features in node and focus on the
fundamentals so let's go ahead and
install the latest stable version
you can see here I get a package we run
it it's an installer take a look very
simple just continue continue continue
install you need to enter our password
and the installation is complete it took
only a few seconds so now back in the
terminal let's run node - - version one
more time you can see I upgraded my node
to version eight point nine point one
next we're going to build our first node
application
alright now we're ready to build our
first node application so I'm gonna
create a new folder call it first app
let's go to this folder now I'm going to
open this folder inside of Visual Studio
code which is my preferred code editor
so code period so this is Visual Studio
code or vs code it's a free powerful
editor but you can use any editors that
you prefer you can use sublime you can
use atom or any other editors so here in
this folder I'm gonna add in your file
app is in this file we can write regular
JavaScript just like the JavaScript that
we write for the browsers so I'm gonna
define a function say hello that takes a
parameter name and simply logs a message
on the console so hello + name and then
we can call this function like this
Marsh now to execute this code we're
going to go back to the terminal and run
node and pass the name of the file as an
argument so app the jas so node as I
told you before is a C++ program it
includes Chrome's v8 JavaScript engine
so this app the J's file that we're
gonna pass to node node is going to give
it to v8 for execution so you can see we
got hello Marsh on the console now let
me show you something
so back in vs code
temporarily comment out this line and do
it console that log of window let's see
what happens so back in the terminal
let's run node app a Jas you got an
exception window is not defined so as I
told you before in node we don't have
the window or document objects these are
part of the runtime environment that we
get with browsers in node we have other
objects to work with files with the
operating system with the network and so
on and that's what you're gonna learn
about in the next section I hope you
enjoyed this section and thank you for
watching
in this section we're going to look at
the module system in node you will learn
what modules are why we need them and
how they work throughout this section
we'll explore a feel of the modules
built into the core of node such as
operating system file system events and
HTTP you will also learn how to create
your own modules now let's get started
so in the last section we use this
console that log function to lock
something on the console now this
console object is what we call a global
object so it's part of the global scope
which means we can access it anywhere in
any files we have a bunch of other
objects and functions that are also
globally available in node for example
we have set timeout which you have
probably seen before we use this to call
a function after a delay like one second
two second whatever so this is just part
of the standard JavaScript we can use
this on the client we can use this
inside of a browser or inside of node
we also have clear timeout
similarly we have set interval which we
use to repeatedly call a function after
a given delay we also have clear
interval which we use to stop that
function from being called repeatedly
so these are the global objects in
JavaScript now he node we have a couple
other global objects that you're going
to learn about later in this section now
in browsers we have this window object
that represents our global scope so all
the variables and functions that are
defined globally we can access them via
this window object so we can call window
that console that log or simply just
console that lock the JavaScript engine
will prefix this statement with window
that console dot lock because that's
where this object is defined similarly
all these other functions you see here
they belong to the window object so we
can call window that's set timeout or
call it directly by the same token when
we declare a variable let's say message
that variable is also available via the
window object okay however in the last
section I told you that in node we don't
have this window object instead we have
another object called global so all
these functions and objects we have here
we can
access them find the global object so we
can do global that console dot log or
global that set timeout and so on of
course it's easier to use the shorthand
instead of prefix in them with this
global but one thing you need to know
about note is that these variables that
we define here they are not added to the
global object in other words if we do a
console dot log of global that message
we are going to see undefined on the
console so let me show you I'm gonna
delete all the code here now back in the
terminal let's run note app j s so we
get undefined in the console so as you
can see the variables and functions that
we defined here they are not added to
the global object they're only scoped to
this fire app dot j s so they are not
available outside of this file and this
is because nodes modular system that
you're going to learn about in the next
lecture
you
so in the last section you'll learn that
in the client-side JavaScript that we
run inside of browsers when we declare a
variable or a function that is added to
the global scope for example when we
define a function like say hello that
function is added to the global scope
and it's available via the window object
now there is a problem with this
behavior in a real world application we
often split our JavaScript code into
multiple files so it is possible that we
have two files and in both these files
we define this function say hello with
the exact same name because this
function is added to the global scope
when we define this function in another
file that new definition is going to
overwrite the previous definition so
this is the problem with the global
scope so in order to build reliable and
maintainable applications we should
avoid defining variables and functions
in the global scope instead we need
modularity we need to create small
building blocks or modules where we
define our variables and functions so
two variables or two functions with the
same name don't overwrite another
variable or function defined somewhere
else that encapsulated inside of that
module now at the core of node we have
this concept called module so every file
in a node application is considered a
module the variables and functions would
define in that file or that module are
scoped to that file in object-oriented
programming terms we say there are
private they are not available outside
that container outside that module if
you want to use a variable or a function
defined in a module outside that module
you need to explicitly export it and
make it public and we're going to look
at that in the next lecture so what I
want you to take away from this lecture
is that every node application has at
least one file or one module which we
call a main module so in this case is
after J s is our main module now let me
show you this module so I'm going to
delete all this code here and do
a console that log of module
now this module object here may appear
to be global so you may think we can
access it while the global object like
global console but actually this is not
a global object it appears to be global
but it's not global and you will find
out why very soon so let's just lock
this module object and see what we see
in the console back in the terminal node
app the jas so you can see we have an
object module it's a JSON object with
these key value pairs so we have ID
every module has an ID or a unique
identifier we have exports parent file
name which is the complete pass to that
file loaded which is a boolean that
determines if this module is loaded or
not we have children and paths now for
now don't worry about these properties
as we go through this section you will
gradually become familiar with this
properties so in node every file is a
module and the variables and functions
defined in that file are scoped to that
module they are not available outside of
that module in the next lecture you're
going to learn how to create and load a
module
alright now let's add a new module to
this application so I'm gonna add a new
file logger dot J s let's imagine we're
going to create a module for login
messages and we're gonna reuse this
module in various parts of this
application or potentially in other
applications so loggernet J s now in
this module let's imagine that we're
going to use one of those remote logging
services for login our messages so there
are websites out there there provide
logging as a service they give us a URL
and we can send an HTTP request to that
URL to log messages in the cloud so here
I'm gonna declare a variable like URL
and set it to something like this HTTP
my lager dot io / lock and of course I'm
making this up it may not be a true
service out there but let's imagine in
this implementation we're going to send
an HTTP request to this endpoint to this
URL now we also need a function called
log that takes a message and in this
function we're going to send an HTTP
request however to keep things simple
here we just want to focus on the
modularity we don't want to get
distracted with all the details of
sending HTTP requests so for now I just
want to log this message on the console
so console that log message okay
now this variable and this log function
they're both scoped to this module
they're private they're not visible from
the outside
however in after j/s which is our main
module we want to use this logger module
so we should be able to access this log
function we should be able to call it
from the app module so we need to make
this public we need to make it visible
from the outside
now in the last lecture you saw this
module object one of the properties we
have here is exports you can see this
property is set to an empty object
anything that we add to this object will
be exported from this module and it will
be available outside of this module so
back in our lager module I'm gonna set
module dot exports dot log so I'm adding
a method called log to this exports
object and simply setting it to this log
function we have defined here okay in
other words the object that we're
exporting here has a single method
called lock now similarly if you want to
export this URL we could do something
like this
so module that exports that URL we set
it to URL and of course we could change
the name that is exported to the outside
for example internally we may call this
variable URL but when we export it we
may call it endpoint okay now in this
case we don't need to export this URL
variable because this is purely
implementation detail so in real world
applications every module might have
several variables and functions we only
want to export a subset of these members
to the outside because we want to keep
this module easy to use let me give you
a metaphor think of a DVD player a DVD
player has a few buttons on the outside
and these are the buttons or objects
that we interact with so these objects
represent the public interface of a DVD
player okay but inside the box there are
lots of other objects or complex objects
we don't need to know anything about
these objects their implementation data
and they can change significantly from
one model to another but what you see on
the outside is almost stable or static
across different models so in our lager
module this URL is implementation detail
modules don't need to know anything
about this they only need to call the
log function so we export these make it
public but keep the URL private so I'm
gonna delete this last line okay so
we're done with our logger module now we
need to load this module and use it
inside app j/s
to load the module we use the require
function this is one of the functions in
node we don't have this in browsers this
function takes one argument and that's
the name or path of the target module we
want to load so here we want to load the
logger module now you can see both the
app module and longer module are in the
same folder so we use period slash to
indicate the current folder and then we
add the name of our module that is
logger ojs or we can make it shorter and
just use logger because node assumes
this is a JavaScript file and it
automatically asked the GS extension now
if this logger was in a subfolder we
could add that soft folder here or if it
was in the parent folder we could use
dot dot slash so here we are using the
relative path to the target module in
this case that module is in the same
folder now this required function
returns the object that is exported from
this target module
so this exports object here this is what
we get when we call the require function
let me show you so I'm gonna declare a
variable call it lager the name of the
module and set it to the return value of
the require function now let's log this
logger and see what we get so node
object s look we get an object this
object has a single method called log
can see that's a function so we can call
this function or this method in app J s
so back here we call logger dot and look
here we have intelligence in BS code so
we call log and pass a message now I can
terminal let's run this app and we get
message on the console so this is how we
work with modules in node
when we define a module we export one or
more members and then to load the module
we use the require function now in the
recent versions of JavaScript we have
the ability to define constants so as a
best practice when loading a module
using the required function it's better
to store the result in a constant like
this the reason for this is because we
don't want to accidentally overwrite the
value of logger like this here if we set
this to one then when we call the log
method we're going to get an exception
let me show you so one more time
look you got logger that log is not a
function now in contrast if we define
this as a constant now back in the
terminal let's run this program one more
time look we got a different kind of
error assignment two constant variable
now there are tools out there that check
our JavaScript code for errors like that
so by using this constructs properly we
can prevent these errors from happening
at runtime
so one of these popular tools is J's
hint if you have never used it before
don't worry I'm just gonna show you a
quick demo so if you're on J's hint 1/2
Jas we get this error attempting to
overwrite logger which is a constant so
with tools like jeaious hint we can scan
all our JavaScript code for errors like
that so that's the benefit of using a
constant as opposed to a variable here
if you accidentally reset this object
then we're gonna get an error at compile
time instead of at run time
okay and one last thing before we finish
this lecture sometimes instead of
exporting an object from a module you
may want to export only a single
function for example here in our lager
module we don't necessarily need an
object because we have a single method
an object would be useful if we had
multiple methods or properties here but
in this case instead of
sporting an object we can export a
single function so we can reset this
exports to the log function so initially
it was an empty object but we reset it
to just a function with that I can op j
s the logger is no longer an object it's
a function that we can call directly
like this so logger we call it and give
it an argument now a better name for
this function is LOC so I'm gonna press
f2 to rename these log like this now
back in terminal let's run node FJ s and
we get the same result so in your
modules you can export a single function
or an object
so now you know the variables and
functions we define in a module are
scoped to that module they're private
and not visible from the outside but you
might be wondering how node does this so
let me show you on the very first line
of the logger jeaious module I'm going
to create a syntactical error so define
a variable X and set it to nothing like
this so make sure to write this code on
the very first line in other words if
you have a line break here and do this
on a second line you're not going to see
what I'm gonna show you now so put this
back on the first line here we have a
syntactical error now back in the
terminal let's run the application again
okay we got on
touken semicolon right but look above
this line you see this function
declaration so this function has a few
parameters exports require module file
name and surname so let me copy this
code here
now basically what happens under the
hood is that note does not execute this
code directly it wraps it inside of a
function and that's the function you saw
so at runtime our code is going to be
converted to something like this so we
have this function declaration here is
the body of that function now for now
I'm gonna remove this error here so this
is our code and then we have the end of
this function now the actual code is
slightly more complicated than this but
we don't want to get distracted with
that complexity if you're a more
advanced JavaScript developer you
probably know this is an immediately
invoked function expression or if you if
you don't know that don't worry that's
not really the scope of note what I want
you to take away here is that note does
not execute our code directly it always
wraps the code inside each module and
something like this inside of a function
now look at these arguments to this
function so you have seen the required
function I told you that this required
function appears to be global but
actually it's not global in fact it's
local to each module so in every module
require is one of the arguments that is
passed to this function we call this
function the module wrapper function
okay so you have seen the require
function you have also seen module that
is what we're using here so we have
module that exports we also have exports
which is a shortcut to module dot export
so if you want to add a function to
module that exports object you can
either write module that exports dot log
equals log or you can write exports that
log equals log but you cannot reset this
export
like what we did earlier in other words
you cannot write export equals lock
because this export is a reference to
module and exports we can
change that reference okay so these are
the first three arguments we also have
filename and Durning which represent the
name of this file and the pass so let's
have a quick look at this argument on
the top I'm gonna do a console that log
of underline underline file name and
also
underline underline Durning now we're
not going to have this function this
module wrapper function this was purely
for demonstration so I'm gonna revert
the code back to what we had before
okay so now we don't have any errors in
this module let's go back to the
terminal and run this program
so note op j s so here on the first line
we have file name which is the complete
path to that file that is lager a s and
on the second line we have the path to
the directory that contains and module
so now you have a basic idea about node
modules and how they work you know how
to create them how to load them but
knowing itself comes with a bunch of
useful modules that we can use in a lot
of applications and that's what we're
going to look at in the next lecture
hi guys thank you for watching my Noah
tutorial I wanted to let you know that
this tutorial is the first hour of my
complete note course where you will
learn how to build a real restful api
using node Express and MongoDB all of
that recorded with the latest version of
node and modern JavaScript so you will
learn new and modern ways of building
applications with node
unlike other courses that only show you
simple the only examples like how to
build a to-do app we're gonna work on a
real-world project a restful api for a
video rental application if you have
taken any of my courses you know I don't
waste your time by explaining the
obvious like what a code editor or
command prompt is we're gonna get
straight to the business and as part of
this I'll be touching on various
important topics that you need to
understand really well including working
with node package manager or NPM
asynchronous JavaScript including
callbacks promises async and await
implementing crud operations data
validations authentication and
authorization using JSON web tokens
including role management handling and
login errors unit and integration
testing test-driven development so you
will see I will build a feature from A
to Z using test-driven development or
TDD and finally we'll deploy this
application to the cloud throughout the
course I will share with you lots of
clean coding and refactoring techniques
security best practices useful libraries
to use as part of your development
common mistakes that many node
developers make and much much more
the course is currently 14 hours long
and I'm planning to add more content to
it in the future you can watch this
course as many times as you want and if
you watch it to the end you will get a
certificate of completion that we can
add to your resume so if you're serious
about adding no to your resume I highly
encourage you to enroll in the course
and don't waste your time jumping from
one tutorial to another so click on the
link in the video description to enrol I
hope to see you in the course
you
so in the last lecture I told you that
in node we have a few useful modules
that are built into the core of node
with these modules we can work with
files with the operating system with a
network and so on so let's have a quick
look at this built in modules head over
to node J s
org then go to Docs on the left side go
to version eight point nine point three
that's the current stable release
chances are by the time you're watching
this video this version might be
different so that doesn't really matter
just pick that version now hearing the
table of contents we can see the built
in modules of course not
everything you see here is a module for
example we have console which is our
console object we have buffer which
we're going to learn about in the future
in this course again that's a global
object but you can see that this is a
fairly short list and some of the items
in this list are built in modules in no
so just that you can see there are not
many modules built into note I'm gonna
highlight a few very useful modules that
you should be aware of for example we
have file system to work with files we
have HTTP that you're going to learn
about later in this section so with this
we can create web servers that listen
for HTTP requests we have OS to work
with the operating system we have path
which gives us a bunch of utility
functions for working with paths we have
process that gives us information about
the current process we have query
strings which is very useful in building
HTTP services we have a stream which
allows us to work with streams of data
again you're going to learn about this
in the future and a bunch of other
modules now in this lecture we're going
to look at is passed module so on the
documentation you can see all the
functions defined in this module in this
lecture we're going to use the parse
method now if you
scroll down you can see how you can use
this module so I've seen the required
function before we call the module using
the required function get the result
which is an object and store it in a
constant so back in vs code in app Jas
let's call require and as the argument
use half now the argument that we gave
to this require function no it assumes
that this is a built in module if there
is no built in module by the name
specified here then node looks for the
existence of a relative path to a file
in this application so if we have period
/ or period period / whatever then
notice oome this is a file in this
application now in this case we're going
to load the building path module and
store it in a constant called pass so
this is an object with a bunch of useful
methods the method we're going to use is
the parse method so I'm gonna give it
this underline underline file name which
is one of the arguments and the module
wrapper function that you saw in the
last lecture so let's call this and
store the result in pass object and then
finally log it on the console has object
now back in the terminal let's run this
application so this is the path object
it has a few useful properties we have
root we have dur which specifies the
path to the folder containing this file
here's the name of the file after jas
here's the extension
the name of the file without the
extension so if you want to work with
pads it's much easier to use the past
module as opposed to working with
strings in the next lecture we're going
to look at another built-in module that
gives us information about the operating
system
in this lecture I'm going to show you
how to get information about the current
operating system so if I can no
documentation in the list of modules if
you scroll down you can see this OS
module let's have a quick look here so
these are the methods that are available
in this module for example we have free
mem which returns the amount of free
memory on this machine
you also have total mem which is the
total memory we can get information
about the current user we can get the
uptime of this machine and so on so
let's use a couple of these methods here
so if you scroll down you can see this
is how we load this OS module just like
loading other modules we call the
required function and store the result
in a constant called OS or anything so
my can be a scone I'm gonna delete all
the code here and define a new constant
OS and study to require OS now we can
call total mem method
or free mem or other methods so let me
declare a variable and store the result
here
and similarly for the free memory free
memory and finally let's lock these
values on the console so console dot log
single code we add total memory and app
and this total memory here now we can
simplify this expression by using a
template string which is available in
more recent versions of JavaScript that
we refer to as es6 or ES 2015 which is
short for ACMA script 6 or 2015
that's the specification that defines
what features are available in
JavaScript so every year Ahmed defines
new features that should be added to
JavaScript and as you know different
browsers implement different set of
these features but the v8 engine that we
have inside of node that's pretty
up-to-date and it implements a lot of
new features of JavaScript that is
defined in Eggman script so in Eggman
script six or eight most script 2015 we
have a feature called template string
which helps us build a string without
concatenations let me show you how that
works so console dot log now instead of
a single quote we use the backtick
character backtick is the character
before number 1 on your keyboard so here
we add some static text like total
memory now we want to add something here
dynamically so we use dollar sign and
curly braces to add a placeholder for an
argument in this case our argument is
this total memory variable so we can see
with a template string we don't have
concatenation okay now I'm gonna
duplicate this line and change total to
free and here let's add free memory okay
now we don't need this first console log
we're done with this let's go back to
the terminal and run this app
occasion so note app but Jas and you can
see the total and free memory on my
machine now what is interesting here is
that before node we could not get this
kind of information using javascript
javascript used to run only inside of a
browser and we could only work with the
window or document objects we couldn't
get information about the operating
system but when using node our
JavaScript code is executed outside of a
browser or as some people say on the
server with this we can get information
about the operating system we can work
with files we can work with the network
for example we can build a web server
that listens for HTTP requests on a
given port and I'm going to show you all
this later in this section
and it's lecture I'm gonna show you how
to work with files in node so I can no
documentation and the list of modules
here we have a module called file system
in this module we have a comprehensive
set of methods for working with files
and directories now in this course I'm
not gonna waste your time showing you
every single method here because that
would be very repetitive but let me show
you an example so you see how to work
with files in node
so back in vs code first we need to
require the FS module we get the result
and store it in this constant now FS dot
look almost every operation defined here
comes in two forms synchronous or
blocking and asynchronous or non
blocking for example look we have access
which is an asynchronous method we also
have access sync which is a synchronous
method now even though we have these
synchronous methods here you should
avoid using them these are there purely
for simplicity in a real world
application you should use asynchronous
methods because these are non blocking
so as I told you in the last section a
node process has a single thread if
you're using node to build the backend
for your application you might have
several hundreds or thousands of clients
connecting to that back-end if you keep
that single thread busy you won't be
able to serve many clients so always use
asynchronous methods now that aside
let's take a look at an example we're
going to look at rate dir or directory
method first I'm going to show you the
synchronous form because that's easier
to understand so as the first argument
we specify the path period slash
represents the current folder and this
will return all the files and folders in
the current folder so files will be a
string array now we can display that on
the console very simple
so note fjs so we can see we get an
array of strings and these are the files
in this folder on my machine now let's
take a look at the asynchronous form of
this method so FS dot read directory
just like before the first argument is
the path so the current folder now all
these asynchronous methods take a
function as their last argument no it
will call this function when that
asynchronous operation completes we call
this function a callback so here look in
the intellisense the second parameter is
a callback and this is a function with
two parameters an error and result which
is in this case a string array so here
we need to pass a function or a callback
function with an error and the result
which is a string array we can call that
files so here we need to check if we
have an error or the result only one of
these arguments will have a value and
the other will be not so if we have
error
we're going to display it on the console
error error now this is not how we
handle errors in a real world
application but don't worry about this
later in the course we have a complete
section about error handling in note for
now we just want to display this error
on the console so if you have an error
we display otherwise we display the
result so console dot log result and we
can display this string array so I'm
gonna comment out these two lines so we
can only look at the result of this
asynchronous read directory now note up
j/s so we got resolved and this is
exactly the string array that we had
before
now let's simulate an error so I'm going
to go back in the code and change this
argument to let's say a dollar sign save
back in the terminal node fjs this time
we go
and error no such file or directory
so to recap in order to work with files
and directories in node first you need
to require the FS module and then use
one or more of the methods defined in
this module all these methods come in
pairs asynchronous and synchronous
always prefer to use asynchronous
methods
one of the core concepts in node is the
concept of events in fact a lot of nodes
core functionality is based on this
concept of events an event is basically
a signal that indicates that something
has happened in our application for
example in node we have a class called
HTTP that we can use to build a web
server so we listen on a given port and
every time we receive a request on that
port that HTTP class raises an event now
our job is to respond to that event
which basically involves reading that
request and returning the right response
so as you go through note documentation
you can see that several classes in node
raises different kinds of events and in
your code you might be interested to
respond to those events so in this
lecture I'm gonna show you how to work
with the events module now back in notes
documentation once again in the list of
modules you can see here we have this
events module so in this module we have
one class that is called event emitter
it's one of the core building blocks of
node and a lot of classes are based on
this event emitter so let's see how we
can work with this event emitter
I can be ESCO first let's load the
events module so require events here
when we call the require function we get
the event emitter class so constant
event emitter note that here in terms of
the naming the first letter of every
word is uppercase this is the convention
that indicates that this event emitter
is a class it's not a function it's not
a simple value it's a class a class is
container for properties and functions
which we call methods so in this event
emitter class
we have these metals that you see here
in the documentation so a class is a
container for a bunch of related methods
and properties now here in order to use
this event emitter first we need to
create an instance of this class so
constant emitter we set this to new
event emitter so here this emitter is an
object in case you don't know the
difference between a class and an object
let me give you a metaphor a class is
like human and an object is like an
actual person like John Mary and so on
so a class defines the properties and
behavior of a concept like a human but
an object is an actual instance of that
class okay so here this first event
emitter is a class it's a blueprint it
defines what an event emitter can do but
this second emitter is an actual object
this is the one that we're going to use
in our application so this emitter has a
bunch of methods look these are all the
metals that you saw in the documentation
now even though here we have more than
ten metals most of the time we use only
two of these methods one is emit that we
use to raise an event the first time I
saw this method it didn't make sense to
me because English is my second language
and I didn't know what emit means so if
you're in the same boat ma it basically
means making a noise or produce
something in this case you're making a
noise in your application you're
signaling that an event has happened
okay so that's the meaning of Emmet and
here we pass an argument that is the
name of the event let's say message
locked
in the future we're going to extend our
lager module and every time we log a
message we're going to raise an event
called message locked okay now if you
run this application nothing is going to
happen let me show you back in the
terminal node app J gasps look nothing
happened because we have raised an event
here but nowhere in our application we
have registered a listener that is
interested in that event a listener is a
function that will be called when that
event is raised
okay so let's register a listener that
will be called when the message log
event is raised so register a listener
so emitter dot look here we have this
method add listener but we have an alias
for this that we use more often that is
on if you're worked with jQuery you have
seen this before
so on or add listener they're exactly
the same but quit often reused on method
now this method takes two arguments the
first one is the name of the event in
this case message locked and the second
one is a callback function or the actual
listener so here we pass a function and
this function will be called when that
event is raised okay now for now I just
want to lock a message in the console so
console let's say listener called like
this now let's run this application so
node FJ guess and we got this message
listener call so this indicates that
when we raise this event
function or listener was called okay and
of course the order is important here if
you register this listener after calling
the Amit method nothing would have
happened because when we call the Amit
method this eMeter iterates over all the
registered listeners and calls them
synchronously okay so this is the basic
of raising events and handling them
using the eve an emitter class
now quite often when you want to raise
an event we also want to send some data
about that event for example in our
lager module when we log a message
perhaps our remote login service will
generate an ID for that message perhaps
we want to return that ID to the client
or it may give us a URL to access that
log message directly so here when
raising an event we can add additional
arguments which we refer to as event
arguments so we can add an ID like one
and we can add a URL but as you can see
these magic values here are a little bit
confusing if you want to send multiple
values about an event it's a better
practice to encapsulate those values
inside an object so here we have an
object we give it a couple of properties
like ID we set it to ID of this message
that is logged and another property URL
like this okay so we're referring to
this object as event argument now when
registering a listener here this
callback function this actual listener
can also receive this event argument so
here we add a parameter called arc we
can call it anything the name doesn't
matter
but by convention we often use arc or
some people use e to refer to the event
or event arc whatever you prefer is
perfectly fine so here we have arc now
let's log in on the console very simple
let's run this application so note okay
look listen are called and here's our
event arc and with this technique we can
pass data about the event that just
happened
now one last thing to make this code a
little bit simpler in es6 or equal
script six we have this feature called
arrow function with an arrow function we
can get rid of this function keyword so
here we have the arguments and after
that we have the body of that function
now to separate the two we use an arrow
and that's why we call this arrow
function you can see this syntax is a
little bit simpler and a lot of people
prefer to use arrow functions in es6 now
here's a simple exercise for you let's
imagine in our lager module just before
calling our remote service to log the
message we're going to raise an event
called logging and while raising this
event we also want to send some data
that is the message that we're going to
lock so what I want you to do is to use
what you have learned in this lecture
and raise and handle is logging event
it's a very simple exercise I just want
you to get used to this syntax
now in the real world is quite rare that
you would work with this event emitter
object directly instead you want to
create a class that has all the
capabilities of the event emitter and
then you will use that class in your
code let me explain what I mean by that
and why so let's open up our lager
module so in this module we're exporting
a simple function log right and here we
log that message on the console now
after this we want to raise an event and
then later in app module we will listen
for that event and do something so let's
go back to our app module and copy some
code into the lager module so on the top
I'm gonna copy these two lines to bring
the event emitter in this module okay
now back in app module I'm also gonna
move these two lines for raising an
event into the lager module because this
code should not be here it's the lager
module that emits or signals an event
saying the message is locked so cut so
here after we log the message you raise
an event like this okay
now back in app module we don't need
this comment here we need to load the
lager module and call the log function
so constant log we call the require
function and set the path to the lager
module and here we simply call the log
function with a message okay now when we
run this application we are only going
to see this message on the console in
other words this event listener will not
be caught let's verify that and then I
will explain why that happens
so back in terminal node app J s look we
only got the message on the console so
our event listener was not caught the
reason for this is because here we're
working with two different event
emitters in app j/s we have this even
emitter object and in longer module we
have another event emitter object so
earlier I told you that a class is like
a blueprint and an object is an actual
instance as a metaphor I said we could
have a class called
human or person but the objects could be
Jack John Mary Bob whatever so in this
case we have two different objects in
the logger module you're using this
emitter object to emit an event whereas
in app module we're using another event
emitter object to handle that event
these are completely different so when
we register a listener here that
listener is only registered with this
event emitter which is completely
different from the other event emitter
so that's why I told you in your
applications it's very rare that you
would want to work with this event
emitter directly instead you want to
create a class that has all the
capabilities of this event emitter but
it has additional capabilities in this
case we want to create a class called
logger that has this additional method
lock okay so the first thing you want to
do here is to define a class in es6 we
have this keyword class which is a
syntactical sugar for creating a
constructor function with this we can
define a class logger note that the
first letter of every word in a class
should be uppercase this is the Pascal
case convention that we use for naming
classes so class logger we have a code
block now we need to move this log
function inside this logger class so cut
paste it here now we have an error
because when we define a function inside
a class we don't need this function
keyword and from now on we refer to this
function as a method so when a function
is inside a class we say that's a method
in that class okay so here we have this
logger class now at the end
I'm exporting the log function we're
going to export the logger class okay
now we want this logger class to have
all the capabilities of this event
emitter the way we do that is by using
the extends keyword that comes in es6 so
extends and here we add the name of the
parent or the base class so event
emitter and with this simple change this
logger class will have all the
functionality that is defined in event
emitter so here when raising this event
instead of using this emitter object
we're going to use this so in this class
we can directly omit or raise events
okay and now we no longer need this
actual emitter object because we have
not used it anywhere in this code so
delete we're done with the logger module
now back in the app module
so here when requiring the logger module
we get a class so I'm gonna rename this
to lager with capital L that's a class
now we create an object so new lager
and then to log a message recall logger
deadlock now similar to the change that
we made in the logger module we no
longer need this event a meter object
here we want to work directly with this
logger object so we're gonna register
this listener on this logger object okay
so I'm gonna move this code after
creating the logger we say hey logger
when you raise this message log event I
want to execute this code okay and
finally you can see we no longer need
this event emitter object it's not used
anywhere delete now when you run this
application we're going to see this
message on the console but also because
we're using the same logger object for
registering an event listener and also
raising an event we're going to see this
message on the console so note fjs look
this is the message on the console and
you can see our listener was
successfully caught so let's quickly
recap if you want to raise events in
your application to signal that
something has happened you need to
create a class that extend event emitter
with this that class will have all the
functionality defined in event emitter
but you can also add additional
functionality in this case we have the
ability to log a message and then inside
that class whenever you want to raise an
event you use this that emit because
this references this longer class itself
which extends event emitter so all the
methods defined an event emitter will
also be part of this class okay and
finally in app module again instead of
using an instance of event emitter you
will use an instance of the custom class
that you have defined that extends event
emitter
one of the powerful building blocks of
node is the HTTP module that we use for
creating networking applications for
example we can create a web server that
listens for HTTP requests on a given
port and with this we can easily create
a back-end service for our client
applications like a web application that
we build with react or angular or a
mobile application running on a mobile
device so once again back in the note
documentation in the list of modules we
can find this HTTP module in this module
you can see various classes like HTTP
that agent HTTP that client requests and
so on each of this classes has a bunch
of properties methods and events so back
in vs code let's load the HTTP module so
constant HTTP we set it to require HTTP
okay now here we can call HTTP dot
create server this is one of the
functions defined in this module and
with this we can create a web server so
let's store the result in a server
object now what is interesting is that
this server is an event emitter so it
has all the capabilities of event
emitter that you saw earlier in this
section so look server dot we have the
on method or add listener or omit and so
on also if you look at the documentation
for the HTTP module on this page you can
see HTTP that's server class here the
documentation says that this class
inherits from net dot server so this is
another class defined in the net module
let's have a look now here the
documentation says that net the server
is an event emitter so that's why I said
a bunch of notes core functionality is
based on if an emitter so back to our
server object now we can call server
that listen
and give it a port let's say port 3000
now following that I'm gonna add a
console deadlock saying listening on
port 3000 okay now when we run this
application this server will listen on
port 3000 as I told you before every
time there is a new connection or new
request this server raises an event so
we can use the own method to handle that
event so before listening we want to
register a listener or a handler so
server dot on the name of the event is
connection then you can find in the
documentation so you don't have to
memorize any of these stuff okay and the
second argument is a callback function
or the actual listener as you can see in
the tooltip here this listener is a
function with one argument that is
socket of type socket class and it
returns void so here we have the arrow
function syntax in es6 so let's add an
error function that takes a socket and
goes to this code block now here we can
simply log something on the console new
connection now back in the terminal
let's run this application we can see we
are listening on port 3000
now back in the browser let's head over
to localhost port 3000 and now if you
look in the terminal you can see we have
a new connection here so you can see
this server object raises different
kinds of events that you can respond to
now in real world applications we are
not going to respond to the connection
event to build an HTTP service this is
very low level so let's delete this what
we commonly do is we pass a callback
function to this create server method so
function this function takes two
parameters request and response or we
can use the error function syntax so we
remove the function keyword and add this
fat arrow here now in this function
instead of working with a socket we can
work with the actual request or response
objects so we can check if request that
URL equals slash then we can send
something to the client for example
response dot write hello world and then
we end the response okay now back in the
terminal we can exit here by pressing
ctrl + C and then run the application
again okay we're still listening on port
3000 let's refresh this page so we got
hello world on home page now if you want
to build a back-end service for our web
or mobile applications we need to handle
various routes here for example we can
have another if block if requested URL
equals slash API slash courses
perhaps here we want to return the list
of courses from the database so we would
do something like this response dot
right here we want to return an array of
objects using JSON so we use JSON dot
stringify and give it an array of
objects now for simplicity here we don't
have to worry
the database or complex objects let's
just return an array of numbers 1 2 & 3
so we pass this to json stringify which
will convert this array into a string
using json syntax and then we'll write
it to the response and finally response
the end now back in the terminal we need
to stop this process again and run it
one more time now in the future I will
show you how we can automate this so
every time we make a simple change to
our application we don't have to restart
it so now back in the browser if we go
to slash API slash courses we get an
array with three numbers so as you see
building a web server we know it is very
easy now in the real world we are not
going to use this HTTP module to build a
back-end service for our application the
reason for this is because as you can
see here as we add more routes this code
gets more complex because we add all of
them in a linear way inside this
callback function so instead we use a
framework called Express which gives our
application a clean structure to handle
various routes internally the Express
framework is built on top of the HTTP
module in node